When the eyes are exposed to light, the pupils constrict. This is the well known pupillary light response. Less well known is that the light response is not a simple reflex, but is modulated by covert visual attention: When you covertly (without looking at) attend to a bright stimulus, your pupil constricts relative to when you attend to a dark stimulus. Here we describe a mental typewriter that is based on this principle: decoding the focus of covert visual attention with pupillometry. Participants fixate their eyes in the center of a display, and mentally select (i.e. covertly attend to) one of several letters presented in a circular arrangement. Each letter is presented on a separate background with oscillating brightness. Small changes in pupil size reflect the brightness oscillations of (the background of) the selected letter, which allows us to determine which stimulus the participant intends to select. Mean selection accuracy is ±90% for untrained participants (based on a preregistered training program with 10 participants), and is nearly perfect for some participants. Our method has several key advantages: It doesn't require any movement other than pupil-size changes; it is intuitive, because there is a direct mapping between the task (attending to a letter) and the goal (selecting a letter); the analysis is performed on-line; it is non-invasive and can be done with affordable, off-the-shelf eye trackers; and it is very reliable. Potential applications include: communication with totally locked-in patients, training of sustained attention, and ultra-secure password input.
