We have introduced a new human-computer interface (HCI) that is based on decoding of covert attention through pupillometry. Participants select a letter by covertly attending to it, without making any overt (eye) movement. Letters are presented within circles of oscillating brightness. Small changes in pupil size reflect the brightness changes of the attended stimulus [reviewed in @MathVan+der+stigchel2015CurrDir], and this allows us to determine which stimulus the participant intends to select.

In the experiment reported here, with healthy untrained participants, our method reached a selection accuracy of around 90%, and an information-transfer rate (ITR) of 4.86 bits/min (%FigITR). Out of ten participants, all but one reached our predetermined criteria for successful training; these criteria were exceptionally stringent, and even the unsuccessful participant achieved 70% selection accuracy, which is often taken as sufficient for a useful BCI/ HCI [e.g., @Astrand2014Selective;@Birbaumer2006Breaking]. During pilot studies with highly trained participants (authors SM and LvdL), we have systematically reached near-perfect selection and ITRs of over 8 bits/min. (Pilot data is available online; see Methods: Materials and availability.) For comparison, P300 spellers that are based on covert attention (i.e. without eye movements) reach an ITR of around 6 bits/min [based on visual spellers reviewed in @Riccio2012JNeuralEng], usually with a combination of trained and untrained participants [e.g., @AcqualagnaBlankertz2013;@Treder2011JNeuralEng]. The performance of our method is thus in the same range as that of the best noninvasive covert-attention BCIs to date.

An important advantage of our method, especially when compared to EEG-based methods, is its ease of use. Only a pupillometer, or an eye tracker that records pupil size, is required. For most experiments, we have used a research-grade eye tracker; but we have also successfully used an EyeTribe (The Eye Tribe Aps, Copenhagen, Denmark), a low-cost eye tracker that provides high-quality pupil-size measurements [@Dalmaijer2014Eyetribe]. Our method does not require eye-tracker calibration, nor training of the selection algorithm. Together, these characteristics set our method apart from currently available methods.

An important application of a HCI/ BCI is as a communication channel for completely locked-in patients, that is, patients with complete loss of motor control [@Birbaumer2006Breaking]. P300 spellers and pupillometry-based methods have been tested successfully in partly locked-in patients with some remaining motor control [e.g., @Marchetti2013Covert;@Stoll2013CurrBiol]. But success with real-world applications has been modest, especially with completely locked-in patients. Important reasons for this limited success are [cf. @Birbaumer2006Breaking]: difficulty of use (some methods require extensive training); low selection accuracy; skin problems due to EEG electrodes; low selection speeds; and the need for sustained attention. Our method solves some of these problems by providing ease of use, avoiding physical contact, and providing high selection accuracy. But other challenges remain, notably low selection speed and the need for sustained attention. In addition, it is unclear to what extent the pupillary light response, which our method relies on, remains intact in completely locked-in state [@Bauer1979JNeurol]. Therefore, future studies are needed to determine how well our method, or a variation thereof, works in patient groups.

A second application of our method is as an ultra-secure way to enter passwords or PIN codes. Imagine a cash machine that is equipped with a pupillometer. To enter a PIN code, the user would be shown a display similar to that depicted in %FigParadigm::a, and enter digits by covertly attending to them. Based on our results (see %FigFullBarPlot), entering a four-digit PIN code would take around two minutes. This is slow, but feasible, and could be useful in situations that require high security.

A third application of our method is as a way to train sustained attention. To select a letter, participants must attend to it for some time, which is effortful. Therefore, a game-like variation of our method could be an attractive way to train sustained attention. The main benefit of our method over regular attention-training exercises is direct feedback: The user can be immediately notified when there is a lapse of attention. (In our experiments, feedback was provided by changing the size of the target letter.)

In conclusion, we have presented a new pupillometry-based method to translate thought into letters. Our method is highly accurate and easy to use, and does not require elaborate equipment, preparation, or training. We have highlighted communication with completely locked-in patients, ultra-secure password input, and training of sustained attention as possible applications.
