A brain-computer interface (BCI) translates thought into action. BCIs provide new ways to interact with computers; importantly, they can restore the power to act and communicate in locked-in patients with little or no motor control [@Birbaumer2006Breaking;@Wolpaw2002ClinNeuro].

There are many types of BCIs [reviewed in @Donoghue2008;@Nicolas2012Sensors], which differ in the neural signal that they use (e.g., neural spikes or electroencephalography [EEG]), the way that neural activity is processed (e.g., through a classifier or by measuring overall activity in specific brain areas), and the actions that they perform (e.g. controlling a robotic limb, or writing text). Here we present a new method, which uses pupil size, rather than brain activity, as the controlling signal. Our method is related to two existing methods: the P300 speller [@FarwellDonchin1988], which is functionally similar to our method but relies on a different controlling signal; and a recent pupillometry-based method [@Stoll2013CurrBiol], which is functionally different from our method but relies on the same controlling signal.

P300 spellers are among the most successful BCIs [reviewed in @Fazel2012P300]. They exploit the fact that rare visual stimuli elicit positive deflections in the EEG signal about 300 ms after their appearance. This event-related-potential (ERP) component is called the P300, and is largest for stimuli that are overtly (while looking at them) or covertly (without looking at them) attended [e.g., @TrederBlankertz2010]. In a classic P300 speller, the participant sees a grid of letters. One letter, or sometimes one full column or row of letters, is highlighted at a time. A P300 is elicited each time that a letter is highlighted. The participant selects a letter by attending to it, usually by looking at it directly (i.e. overt attention), which leads to an increased P300 when that letter is highlighted. In its simplest form, the letter that, when highlighted, elicits the highest P300 is selected; however, most P300 spellers now use sophisticated classification techniques, and pool information from multiple ERP components [@Krusienski2006JNeuralEng]. But the principle remains the same.

The first P300 spellers relied heavily on direct fixation: When participants did not move their eyes, but attended covertly to the letters, accuracy was only around 60%. Thus, four out of ten times the system selected another letter than the user had intended [@TrederBlankertz2010;@Brunner2010]. This was problematic for real-world applications, because BCIs are mostly useful if they work without any overt (eye) movement; otherwise, movement-based methods, such as eye trackers [e.g., @Majaranta2006] or the famous cheek-movement system used by Stephen Hawking, are much more efficient. However, modern P300 spellers no longer require (eye) movement, and reach impressive accuracy based on covert attention alone [@Treder2011JNeuralEng;@AcqualagnaBlankertz2013]+[; reviewed in @Riccio2012JNeuralEng]. For example, a recent system that uses sequentially presented stimuli reached 97.1% selection accuracy with 1.35 characters per minute [@Treder2011JNeuralEng]. Expressed as information-transfer rate (ITR), which is a common measure for evaluating BCI performance [@Yuan2013InformationTransfer], this corresponds to 6.18 bits/min. (Invasive techniques, using electrodes that are implanted in the brain, reach far higher ITRs [e.g. @Gilja2015]; however, their use is limited because few people are willing to undergo brain surgery [@Birbaumer2006Breaking].)

However, P300 spellers have several practical disadvantages. First, they require high-quality EEG-recording equipment, which is expensive. Low-cost EEG systems are becoming available, but, for the moment, are less reliable than more expensive systems [e.g., @Duvinage2013]. Second, EEG electrodes must be carefully applied to the head. This is a tedious procedure that must be regularly redone, because current EEG systems are not designed for permanent use, and recording quality degrades over time. Electrodes also cause physical discomfort. Third, most P300 spellers require a calibration phase during which a classifier is trained on a person's EEG signature. Again, this is tedious, and must be redone regularly to avoid performance degradation. These are hurdles for real-world applications [see also @Birbaumer2006Breaking].

Recently, a very different method, based on pupillometry, was developed and tested with partly locked-in patients [@Stoll2013CurrBiol]. This method exploits the pupillary dilation (enlargement) that accompanies effortful mental activities, such as arithmetic [reviewed in @Laeng2012Perspect]. Participants were first asked a yes/ no question, and then sequentially shown two response options ('yes' followed by 'no', or vice versa; each option was shown once). A calculation was shown together with each response option (e.g. '29 x 49'). Participants were instructed to perform the calculation only during the interval of the intended response. The selection algorithm was simple: The response that elicited the strongest pupillary dilation (i.e. when the participant was calculating) was selected. Healthy participants reached around 90% selection accuracy with around 3.6 selections per minute (ITR = 1.93 bits/min; ITR is low because yes/ no selections carry little information). Typical locked-in patients reached around 70% accuracy with around 2.7 selections per minute (ITR = 1.42 bits/min). This method is much less efficient than a P300 speller; but it requires only a pupillometer (e.g. a remote camera), and does not require extensive preparation or calibration. These are advantages for real-world applications.

Here we present an entirely new human-computer interface (HCI) that combines the performance of a P300 speller with the usability of pupillometry. Our system builds on the recent discovery that the pupil constricts (shrinks) when you covertly attend to a bright stimulus, compared to a dark stimulus [@Mathôt2013Plos;@Mathôt2014Exo;@Binda2013Surf;@Naber2013Osc]. That is, unlike traditionally assumed, you do not need to look directly at a bright stimulus to elicit a pupillary light response; a covert shift of attention is sufficient [reviewed in @MathVan+der+stigchel2015CurrDir]. Our method exploits this by presenting multiple letters within circles that oscillate between brightness and darkness. The participant selects a letter by covertly attending to it, without making any overt (eye) movement. The size of the pupil oscillates along with the brightness of the attended letter. This allows us to determine, reliably and in real time, which stimulus the participant intends to select.
